Make some introductory comments for a few minutes
then that's great, and then we will ask lots and lots of questions.
Just so you know, I don't know if you've followed where we've got to, but
we're getting close to the end of hearing from everyone
that we can hear from.
Probably like, yeah, I think we're trying to get MSC in here as well.
We've been to seaport, have ports in here, we've had customers in here,
we've land-based transport providers, we've had
unions.
So we've still got a few to go, but we're trying to get our coastal shipping.
We're trying to get just a picture overall that we can then make some judgments on,
but it's very important for us to have the major shipping lines in here too.
So we're very grateful to you here. Bye.
Thank you, and thank you for the opportunity to be here.
I think that just as an open statement, certainly from
Maersk,
when we look at New Zealand and the importance of trade for New Zealand and
the fact that we're so far away from our markets, very much,
we look at a very long, skinny supply chain.
Unlike other trades in the world where we have vessels that go around
onto a number of ports and a number of countries, there is the ability
to mix and match cargo so that you're driving good utilization.
When we come to New Zealand, it's completely
reliant on the trade into New Zealand and out of New Zealand to fill the vessel
and drive the utilization both ways.
So
what's very important for us is how those vessels
work the coast, how they make sure that they are spending as least
time as possible on the coast, and are we doing the best for
the New Zealand exporter and importer in terms of what the service that we're
providing.
So what you'll see from our submission, there were four pillars around that that we
believe that were important to drive this.
I'm happy to talk to them individually, or we can do-
Well, I think if you want to highlight some key points, that would be very useful
So the key pillars that we see in
terms of if we're going to position ourselves in New Zealand for
the growth that we're looking to drive and also
attack cost and efficiencies.
When we look at New Zealand right now and you see
there's roughly around about nine ports, of which three
are significant, and then there's a lot of other ports.
And you see when you
look at driving ocean capacity around those ports, what
you do is you actually chew up important transit time.
So, a network can spend seven to 10
days on the New Zealand coast. So that means from the first port it loads
to the last port it loads, if you're on the first port, your transit to your key
market is plus seven days than the last port.
So there's some inequities on the time that the ship's been on the water.
The model that we have run in the past, what we run now, and is very successful is
the hub and spoke model. So that's really the first bit that we'll talk to.
What that really means in terms of a New Zealand operation is
you focus your major network. So for us, it's the Southern Star, which is our
network that goes up to Tangin Palapas in Malaysia.
So when you talk about a network, you're meaning a ship.
Voyager ships.
Yeah.
Yeah. So
this
network is called the Southern Star network.
It currently comes down, it runs north-south through the coast.
It then goes up to Tangin Palapas, which is our major hub.
And from there, we touch every service around the world.
So from there, you'll go anywhere from Northeast Asia,
Southeast Asia, South Asia, Africa, Middle East, Europe.
That's the-
So essentially, you're arriving Auckland.
Yeah.
Going down the coast.
Then departing.
Departing Port Chalmers.
Port Chalmers.
Yeah.
And going to?
Tangin Palapas in Malaysia.
Malaysia, right, okay.
So then if you look at
what the length of time that spends on the coast and then you sort of say, "Okay,
well, how could this be better?" So our view on life is
we would look to the New Zealanders establish two hubs.
So you'd have one in the North Island and one in the South Island, and then you
would feed those hubs either by an improved coastal
network, or you would look at the
land-based infrastructure to support that, and the obvious one being
rail.
So that would be Tauranga, Lyttelton.
I don't like putting names on ports, but you'd have to pick
in the North Island, Tauranga would be a
strong contender. South Island would be a question of how you'd look at that.
Then to support that, you need
the coastal network that's going to support that.
In the South Island, you could argue that eastern seaboard, that could be rail,
right?
But if you look at the North Island, where you've got places like Nelson and
Napier, which well, Nelson in the South Island, but Napier in the North Island,
which aren't as well-serviced by rail, then you would need to have a coastal
network. To support that, we would need some
changes in the legislation just around the coastal network because
the legislation sort of precludes us
operating efficiently around the coast, and that's the same for any
ocean carrier.
The second leg of the discussion is the
operational performance of some of the container terminals.
We need to really
nail down how we get some improvements in that space.
So if you look at the major New Zealand ports,
they're all in the bottom quartile according to World Bank ratings on
efficiency and how they work.
Mm.
There is some
work that's been done in Tauranga which will help if it comes through,
but it doesn't provide the full answer.
We need to look at how the cargo's flowing through those terminals and how they're
operating. We believe that-
Can you just tell us what your measure of efficiency is?
Because we've had quite a number of different measures of efficiency which have
been given to us that don't all marry up-
Yes
... from different parties.
So the World Bank
publishes a-The measure of
efficiency, I don't have that particular number now, but it's a recognized
measure. And that's where we're taking our information from
and our comparison from. So we're not looking at
Australia, New Zealand ports or anything.
We're looking at comparable-sized ports around the world.
Oh, so you're not comparing
one of our ports with Singapore or-
No
... someplace. Yeah.
No. It's comparable-
Comparable sized ports
... comparable sized ports and operations.
The
other part of the pillar that we've looked at, and I touched on it earlier, is just
what are we doing with the inland infrastructure to support the
ships when, and the terminals when they're alongside.
What's our ability to build inland
hubs so that we can stage cargo in that takes the
pressure off the terminals when the ships are in, and it allows the
ship to come in and the
terminal will work very
efficiently. And the last one is really just around this,
developing this sustainable and safe skill.
We're very much focused on
the development of people, development of skill, and safety, and
safety culture around the operations.
Okay. Questions time.
Yep.
Right. Okay. I'm going to give Simon the first crack, and then I'm going to put the
next three. But-
Okay
Hang on. No, seriously, I'll take it one then after Simon Wego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So a couple of things.
You talked about efficiency of container handling.
We saw Port of Auckland, with the best of intentions, attempt an automation
project.
It hasn't succeeded in the way they wanted, but we've seen automation
being delivered in other ports around Asia Pacific to a
greater or lesser extent.
What do you think this committee should be looking at in terms
of how we get the best out of automation?
Is it a stage thing? Is it a scale thing?
Is it a pick a technology thing? What are the things we should be
thinking about?
So
when we look at it, the best way to develop that is
to use proven known technologies.
And it would be fair to say that if you look at
where we've been successful in the past and where we've developed terminals,
it's by leveraging what we learned around the world and what
works in the local environment.
I don't think that there is one answer.
It's a case of looking at the model that's been run.
Is the port a transshipment port or a hub?
Is the port a feeder port?
How much do you need to invest in that life?
But really the focus needs to be on those hub ports.
Yeah.
So there is no easy answer, but it's a case of leveraging off
experience.
Yeah. Okay. And just in terms of the land-based
infrastructure or
inland port infrastructure, how close does an inland
port need to be to the water
for it to be operationally, functionally effective?
And what kind of connections are necessary?
Are we talking about direct rail into
right under the crane, or are we talking
a road freight route?
How should we optimize that?
So our view very much on that one, and this is partly around an
emissions discussion as well, is the
inland terminal needs to have rail infrastructure in, and it needs to be
serviced by rail. Part of one of the drivers
around rail, and when you look at the development that we have done in
Raukura and then the connection to the Raukura Rail Siding is the fact
that you can fully
utilize the capacity of a container on a rail wagon, which you can't use on a
road wagon. So you need that scale.
The terminal needs to have a strong rail marshaling area, so it
doesn't need to go direct to crane.
But the principle of an inland hub is that you start
collecting cargo 10 days out before the ship arrives, but you don't want 10 days'
worth of vessel cargo on the terminal.
So that allows the terminal then to call the cargo in
after they've worked the previous ship.
Mm.
So an inland hub can be anything between
four to five hours away-
Right
... from the terminal itself. Where you drive true
benefit is when you place that inland hub close to the
manufacturer or the processing of the product.
Interesting.
So then you take away the road haul,
and you then provide the customer a viable alternative to attack their
transport cost, but then you collect it and use rail.
Very helpful insights. Thank you very much.
So an example of that might be if you've got a railway line servicing, I'm going to
use Fonterra as a major customer. You've got a railway line pretty much directly
servicing a
major plant.
Yep.
The railway then can take you straight up to-
Mm
... even if it's three hours, whatever it might be, can still take you straight up
to your marshalling yards
in your inland port, and then straight onto the ship, straight up to the-
It's a bit more than that, to be honest.
A bit more than that, to be fair, from our view, because if
you look at major plants like Fonterra plants that are all rail-enabled-
Mm
... that's 100%, the container will rail in and rail out.
That's how it works.
Yeah.
If you look at a lot of the meat processing
plants, they have either decommissioned their siding, or they don't have a siding.
So that will never work for them. So from a line perspective,
and you think about
if you put a rail siding in the middle of,
again, I'll use the Waikato as an example.
You've got probably withinThree to four
hours on a truck, you've got at least 10 parts-
Mm-hmm
... all individual, many different parts.
So what you do is you then put the empty container in the middle of them.
So the truck for the
customers just took that to Hamilton, back out to Te Kuiti, for example,
and then they bring it full back to
Hamilton or Raurimu, and then it goes on rail into Tauranga or Auckland from
there.
Yeah. Can you just talk us through the
hub and spoke bit? So at the moment,
your ships,
just take us through, because it sounds as though they're docking at multiple
different ports in New Zealand.
Yes.
You're telling us effectively that that's not ideal.
You'd rather dock at less of them, but do more work at fewer
of them, and then have the rest serviced by
either coastal shipping or
rail or whatever else it might be.
Yeah. So there's a version of that.
If you look at,
for Maersk today, we run essentially five different networks
through New Zealand.
Okay.
So we have a network that goes to Tangier and Pelorus, which is our main workhorse.
So that's our big network. So that's the Southern Star.
Sorry, so where did it go?
So that's the one that currently goes Auckland, Napier, Littleton, Port
Chalmers,
Tangier, and Pelorus.
Auckland, Napier.
Yeah. So it's currently calling Napier as well for the minute for the apples.
Then if you look at another service we run, which is a similar
vessel, that's called the Northern Star.
Yeah.
And that calls Napier, Nelson, Timaru,
Tauranga, and that goes up to North Asia. So that goes up into China.
Yeah.
And so it's more of a direct service.
The third network we run is a direct service to
the East Coast of North America, and that goes
Port Chalmers,
Tauranga out.
Then we have shared networks. We have one up to
the West Coast, which only calls Tauranga.
And then we have another shared network which goes
direct into Japan, which calls five ports in New
Zealand.
Our view on life is if we looked at, say, the Southern Star became our main,
for want of a better terminology, hub and spoke service,
is that you would then use, that would come down to Tauranga,
Littleton, for the sake of this conversation, and go to Malaysia.
So it spends less time on the coast, means you get faster transits
for those key markets up to Pelorus and beyond.
Then you use the other networks to feed a cargo.
So you would still definitely need an ocean feeder for somewhere
like
Nelson, which is land-based trade.
You'd definitely need the what?
You'd definitely need a feeder service and a coastal network service.
So we are talking a coastal shipping service, because that's one of the things is
that-
Yeah
... you get from the coastal shipping side is
you're competing on going to all those different places.
Yeah.
You're competing with coastal shipping.
Your price, your economics is much stronger than theirs is.
Yeah.
But what you're saying is actually, from your perspective, what you're doing at the
moment is not optimal.
No. I think it's important for
us to differentiate between coastal and feeder.
Mm.
So what we're actually operating is a feeder network because we're only taking
deep sea cargo.
Mm.
So we're focusing with the customer to put our container into their
port so that they can load it, and then we're feeding it into our mainline network.
So for example, Nelson is a classic example.
We have
one of our services, Northern Star, it'll come down into Nelson from
Asia. It's a smaller ship, so it can work Nelson easier.
And we'll go in there, and we'll position our empties in there for that market.
Now, the apples that go from Nelson go all over the world.
Mm.
So that will then pick up those apples and then take them to Tauranga or
to Port Chalmers to connect to the different vessels,
whether they're going to the East Coast, North America, whether they're going to
Europe, wherever they're going. So what we're talking about here is
a feeder operation. We're not out there competing in the
coastal market.
We're just putting our containers that we're going to load and around.
Dan?
Thanks, Tony.
Just continuing on the hub and spokes model, you mentioned in your submission
around Section 198.
Yeah.
Just want to get a clear understanding of, so you have
your five
child routes.
Yeah.
I'm guessing that Section 198 applies to all five.
Is that correct?
Yes.
In an ideal world, are you telling us that you think if we
can change 198 or get rid of it,
then
what does that mean for Maersk in terms of the five?
That you collapse that to two or three?
Five.
Yeah.
So
on the principle that
four of the networks are offering really for us
key direct markets as well. So the direct service to the East
Coast, North America, the direct service to the West Coast, the direct service to
North Asia. From the way our market share is working
now, that will remain. The amendment to the act
that we see that would drive a better cost efficiency, and
that is probably the one area, is the ability to double call a port and a
rotation.
To double. Can you explain that for us?
Yes. So for example, on
the rotation right now, a
deep sea ocean-going vessel can only call
a continuous voyage.
Mm.
So if we say, for example, from a business customer
need-We say that we're going to come down, we're going to go to Christchurch, we're
going to go to Timaru to pick cargo up in Timaru, then we're going to go back to
Christchurch-
Got you
... to load.
We're not allowed to do that because that's not continuous.
Yeah. That's 198, isn't it?
Yeah.
Yes.
So that's the reference to the act there, that change,
it wouldn't see fewer services. It would just allow
us to be more efficient.
With the vessels, you've got the balance of flows of weight, of draft
and-
Yeah
... imports, so you can only go in with certain drafts into so many ports, so
you've got to be very careful about what you load.
Because New Zealand, and if you look at it, we're an export dominant
country, and a very large part of our business
is, and the business of all ocean carriers, is your ability to put empty containers
around the coast.
Yeah.
So sometimes it works better if you just get a double one.
And is
it your view that Section 198's kind of
out of step with other markets? How does it...
If we moved-
Yeah
... away from that or amended it, would it be bringing us more
into line with
other markets?
I think that
different countries have very much different rules around what you can do on the
coast. The US have got the Jones Act.
Australia have got their legislation as well.
I think that the challenge that
we have in New Zealand is just the
distance and the
range of options and choice.
Really, if you look at it from each of the networks, you get one call a week, and
if you can't get that right, then you're in trouble.
Versus you go to some of these wider international markets, there's a vessel every
second day.
Okay, thank you.
Can I take on that?
Keep going. Go on. Yeah.
What
is the impetus behind that legislation, no double?
Yeah.
That it needs continuous. What problem was that trying to
solve, and how can we
make those changes while still
not
opening up the original?
I don't know.
Was it a legacy of something that no one could-
Yeah, it's a legacy. It's been there for as long as I've
sort of been kicking around.
Mm.
So it is very much a legacy legislation.
I think that
there will be other parties that have very,
very strong views.
Right. Because it was formed from something.
Yeah.
So going back to your, you haven't spoke at the moment, and
so you've got the five different networks, but what
I'm hearing is that they are not the optimal arrangement.
Clearly, you want the 198 so that you can actually do something where you're going
to the same port twice.
Yeah.
At the very least. But if you had your optimal arrangement,
what would it look like?
So it wouldn't be a lot different than what you see today.
Yeah.
In terms of the, I don't see fewer vessels come, because we will maintain
at least four of those strengths because they provide us with direct products into
different parts of the market, which is very important for us.
Different parts of the world, yeah. Yep.
But the ability to use some of those smaller vessels to move
cargo, or to feed up cargo around the coast, both
import and export, is the efficiency
or the gain that would return efficiencies back to the New Zealand
market.
And do you still need
excuse me, a range of different sizes of vessels to service New Zealand,
presumably because the destination markets are also a different scale for
us in terms of the amount of product going to them?
Yeah. So it's a combination of markets.
It's also a combination of, if we're serving coastal
ports, what size vessel can that port handle?
Mm.
What's the total length it can handle? What's the total draft it can handle?
So there, if you look at our workhorse
service, the Southern Star, it's certainly limited to ports it can
call into New Zealand.
So if you're looking, because we've had quite a bit of discussion about how many-
Right
... how many TEU
any given port can take. So if you're looking a few years down the track, we
understand, I think,
the vast majority now of new vessels, and with the knowledge of the vessels going
to be around a while, the vast majority of new vessels are
going to be 8,000 TEU plus.
So you're always going to get a range of vessels.
Yeah.
If you look at what we're building right now, we're building in the
8,000 to 16,000 TEU range.
Yeah.
We've got a fleet of the 23, 24,000 TEU range, but
the model that we are running globally is quite different these
days, and it's quite different from other lines.
So when we use the big vessels,
24,000 TEU vessels, they're on a network called the
Gemini. So they're only going to call about five or six
ports, or eight ports in the world.
Yeah.
And if you are a New Zealand exporter today, you'd use the
Southern Star. You'd go up to Malaysia to our transit port.
You'd then get on
one of the 24,000 TEU vessels, and you'll go up to Rotterdam,
and we'll put it all in Rotterdam. And then in Rotterdam, we're using the 8,000 to
16,000 TEU vessels to essentially run a bus
service. So you'll be dropped in Rotterdam, and using the
technology and the track, we can guarantee connections-
Yeah
... while the two vessels are alongside working.
Mm.
And making the most of the technology that we have.
And then it'll go to Hamburg, it'll go to Copenhagen,
or go to wherever that end destination is.
So when you started, you said that basically we
want two core ports, one in the north, one in the south.
Yep.
I'm trying to reconcile that with
Having a range of different size vessels that are also calling at the smaller
ports as well. So the two core ports would, for
example, be Tauranga and Dalton. Then you would use our North American
service that would pick up cargo from there, and imports
would drop the imports into Nelson that needed to be in Nelson, put the empties
into Nelson, load the freight up, then take it to another port to go
back to Palapis. So it's a case of still using our existing
networks, but it's using them more efficiently.
So what needs to change at those ports, those big hub ports?
So
they need to improve their efficiency and their rating.
They need to improve their crane moves.
They need to improve the overall throughput because essentially what we're going to
do, we're not actually going to take volume away from the ports around, but we
are going to focus volume on those two big ports.
So they need to be able to
step up and handle it.
Okay.
Tony's got another question about-
It's a question, which is about cabotage.
Mm-hmm.
And I've taken the point about the 198 and the
reference to continuous journey.
The other sort of aspect to that is that the cargo needs to be incidental to what
is kind of on board. So we've
heard a few views, different views around that-
Yep
... particular aspect.
What is your sort of acknowledgement or thinking in that particular space?
In terms of-
Around the incidental.
In terms of the, sorry the-
The inclusion of cargo, so for coastal-
Yep
... purposes, it needs to be incidental to the loading on
the vessel.
Yeah.
There's been some suggestion, for example, that perhaps that word shouldn't exist,
but it should be more qualified in terms of quantum, those sorts of things.
So just interested in your thoughts.
So I'm not particularly right over that one.
But I think very much that for us it's about the
feeder cargo for our network.
Mm-hmm.
We're focused on the deep sea cargo. We're not focused on the coastal cargo.
Okay. But the fact that you are
sort of on a journey-
Yep
... around the place, still domestic cargo is
a key part of or maybe not a key part, is a part of
what you carry?
Yeah.
It's certainly not a key part of what we carry.
What we have to balance up with is
the capacity on the vessel for our deep sea cargo, so we can't
load, we won't load domestic cargo at the expense of
loading the deep sea box.
We also need to be very aware and cognizant of
the
impact to our ability to place empties
into markets. I think it's fair to say, it is fair to say
that we place a lot of empties around from Auckland and Tauranga
down south. So if there is ability to load some cargo into that,
but it's not our core, it's just
the ability to move a,
put a box down in the South Island to load for export.
Wow.
So if you were able to do, I mean, you can kind of see that in terms of
sovereign resilience and all that sort of stuff you need,
every nation needs to be able to have internal
transport networks.
Yes.
And you essentially being
able to feed your own deep sea product
around the country is what you're asking-
Yeah
... for the ability to do, not get involved in
otherwise other domestic
cabotage.
Yeah.
But what would prevent you from
stifling
other ability to be able to
grow coastal shipping and cabotage?
Or not cabota- and not rely on cabotage.
So
our focus is for ownership to go-
Mm-hmm
... to and from New Zealand.
When we operate around the coast, we are quite often at
capacities
that we can't load
domestic cargo.
Mm.
So when we look at,
when
certainly when the season's running hot like right now, when we sail
somewhere like from Napier to join another vessel
or when we sail south, we're full.
We're hitting our dead weight, we're hitting our numbers because it's carrying
cargo that's going to go up to Tauranga, be discharged, and then go
deep sea, and then that's the space that we load into from Tauranga off to
other ports.
Mm-hmm.
So
it's fair to say that it's
not
something that, it's fair to say that it's not something that we don't look at,
but we
have to look after our deep sea customers first.
First, yeah.
Can I just follow up on that? And I appreciate your answers, and I appreciate that
you're a business. But if you're saying that your
focus is on deep sea product and not the domestic stuff,
does your pricing mechanisms for domestic
cargo align with that approach?
So it's not sort of an incentivization in terms of cost to carry
domestic product or cargo
in terms of the operations.
So our approach on pricing
is it's
not a target to lift. So we're not going to go and price into
pure coastal cargo because it's not a priority for us.
If we have a customer that
has a need, comes to us and says, "Look, you're doing all my deep sea, can you move
something southbound?" We will look at it if
it suits our needs for putting empty equipment down there.
If it doesn't suit our needs for putting empty equipment, so for example, we won't
look at coastal cargo south, north.Because we're
container deficit in the South Island,
so we will only focus on
the
deep sea cargo.
Okay. Helpful.
Can I just follow that up? So
sending lots of empties down south.
Yeah.
I'm assuming that is because there is more product being created down
south which needs exporting than there is relative to north.
Yeah.
Correct?
Yeah. So the nature of New Zealand is 75% of the import market
goes to the upper North Island through Tauranga-
Yeah
... Northland. Probably 20% will go in through Lyttelton, and then 5% through other
areas.
The nature of our inbound market is heavily leveraged
into dry containers. So your 40-foot standard containers because we're buying-
That's the nature of the import market.
Yeah, it's the nature of the market.
So, you've got your outdoor furniture, your barbecues, your TVs, all those
wonderful things that seem to be on special every week.
Your outbound market,
when you come down to the South Island, is heavily leveraged around food,
meat, dairy,
seafood. So that's a reefer export market.
So everything that we can bring into New Zealand,
when we're doing our import market plan, we have to balance
on the dry cargo coming in, but we also have to bring empty reefers
in. And the empty reefers come from different places, to feed into New Zealand
so that we have the market. If you look at the South Island,
South Island is very strong
in both refrigerated cargo, but also with the dairy industry and
dry containers as well.
So we're forever moving containers around to where the demand
is for load. So that's a very important part of the balancing
planning that we do.
So 75% of the imports come into North Island?
Yeah.
Question for Tracy here. What's the volume-
What's the split
... the volumes you're seeing in terms of the export side of things-
Right
... island to, north versus south?
In terms of rough percentages,
these
days, it'll probably be about 55% North Island,
45% South Island.
Roughly.
And that 75% you said in the first place, that was the upper North Island.
Yes.
What about the lower North Island?
That's on top of that as well.
To be fair now, most of the stuff that goes into,
say, potentially over Tauranga is covering-
It's covering the whole North Island.
Yeah. It's pretty much covering the North Island.
So outbound's 55/45-
Yeah
... North Island, South Island.
Yeah.
So it's very useful numbers. And your pattern, do you think will be influenced by
other shipping lines that service New Zealand?
So-
Those numbers, you think will be broadly reflective of-
Broadly reflective.
Yeah.
Okay.
So the bit about in and out,
because we export a lot of
refrigerated goods, so reefers.
Yeah.
So
we're getting a huge chunk of our container movement is going to be
reefers going out, then coming back empty.
Yep.
And
dry goods are largely the reverse.
Yeah.
Coming in full and going back out empty.
So that can't do a whole lot. There's not much we can do about it, but they can't
do a whole lot for the cost of servicing New Zealand.
Yeah. I
can say
from a Maersk position,
because of our position with certainly one key customer, in terms of our dry boxes,
we're pretty good-
Oh, yeah
... at using our dry boxes out.
But the empty boxes, we need to bring in.
So it's a lot of milk powder that goes out of New Zealand.
Yeah.
So we're quite well.
70%.
So dry boxes aren't too bad. It's the reefers.
It's the reefers that we need to bring in.
Yeah.
The dry boxes all come into the North Island for
the consumables, and then we need to clean them up and move them down the line.
So dry box is reasonably balanced.
Ish. Yes.
Ish.
Yeah.
Okay.
Somebody else got a question while I'm contemplating my exterior of
brown twit.
Well, okay, back us well. On your improved performance of container
terminals,
I've now found the
efficiency measure you're using is crane moves per hour.
Yeah.
The bit that we've also got is the number of cranes you actually
apply to any given vessel. In other words, how quickly you get the vessel loaded-
Yeah
... and unloaded, because obviously if you apply more cranes, they're both the same
level of cranes per hour or movements per hour,
you get it out twice as quickly. So is that the
best model for you? Because I think what we heard from Auckland, and I think it was
Auckland in particular, was
that efficiency's not bad for crane moves per hour, but they only apply one of them
as opposed to they should maybe apply two.
Yeah.
That was the kind of thing that came through, I think.
Well, I think,
certainly the Ports of Auckland have more than one crane on their terminal.
Mm-hmm.
So it's your ability to
lean into those cranes and use them.
You will have some challenges around the
length of the vessel and how many cranes you can put to a vessel.
Yes, that's right. Yeah.
But we sort of view that when we look at the terminal efficiency,
there's gains to be made by
leveraging the learnings from some of these international terminals and the way
they operate.
Mm-hmm.
We tend to see that the,
in all fairness, that all the measures and
numbers they use are
quite internal or local
and not really benchmarking against similar port sizes around the world.
So what are the key things that we do?
I mean, you've
made a suggestion about granting concessions for operations to experienced
operators, which is a different model to what we've got here.
But what are the key changes you would see in the ports
themselves to make them more efficient?
And while I'm asking a question about port, the one thing that does come through
time and time again is the centrality of Tauranga.
Yeah.
And that they're a little bit short of wharf space.
I think that
the conversation going around Tauranga and the wharf space there is a very
important one, and one that needs to be settled.
The concept for Stella Wharf.
Yeah.
That's only part of the story, though.
You don't solve or hit the new heights just by making things
bigger, because then potentially you make the problem bigger.
Yeah.
So unless there's the investment to go along with it, and investment
needs to be in hardware,
cranes, straddles.
The investment also needs to be around software and systems and processes that
they're using. The investment also needs to be in some of these inland ports to
stage cargo to come in.
So the investment is
multi-layered.
We firmly believe that international operators
have a role to play there and an opportunity there to come in
and achieve some of those efficiencies.
You mean international operators on the port itself?
Yep.
Yeah.
Yes.
Okay.
Just one of the things, the other question I was going to
ask was just the
attractiveness of New Zealand as a market to Maersk and to other
shipping operators. There's been a bit of noise about that from time to time.
Yeah.
What does it look like for you?
So for Maersk, it's a very important market for
us. We have a very important
agreement with Kotahi here in New Zealand.
I think that that
agreement is super strong for Maersk, super strong
for Kotahi, but I think it's also super strong for New Zealand
because that underpins the commitment that we have down to this
part of the world and what we do down here.
It underpins the investment that we're making with the vessels that would come down
here.
As I said, New Zealand isn't a cheap place to come to and operate
in.
But we're also aware of the role that we play.
So any opportunity to do things
better, smarter, or faster, that at the end of the day will
drive
benefits back to the New Zealand exporter or the New Zealand importer.
It's what we need to do.
Mm-hmm.
So we see
us as a very important partner to New Zealand.
And that's a long-term commitment, isn't it, as well?
It's a long-term contract, but you're obviously seeing it keeping on going and
beyond that.
Yep, so we've just completed a 10-year cycle and renewed for another
10 years.
Great.
Yeah.
Colleagues, are other questions-- I have one which fluttered through my head
momentarily there. I'm not seeing any. Yeah?
No, I thought-
It's good.
There will be, but that's
We're clear?
It feels like an intro.
Is there anything else that you'd like to say just to finish off with, Tony?
Thank you for the opportunity.
I think
we recently had the chairman of our board of the AP
Møller group come through New Zealand.
Again, that's an indication of just how we see New Zealand and
the opportunity that we see down here.
We believe that we've got a lot to offer,
and we'd like to certainly explore those opportunities to see what we
can do next. I think it's very important.
An important comment is we can't do it in isolation.
Mm.
There are a number of parties and players around,
so it would be very important for us to see a
clear strategy for what New Zealand looks like going forward and
who's going to--
we see, really, the government bringing that strategy together.
But we are very keen to be part of that discussion and part of that
growth and development.
And would it be fair to say, at the moment, you're not seeing-
No
... you don't see a strategy at the moment?
You see possible aspirations to one, but no strategy.
That would be fair. Look, I think if you look around the
players, all I can mention is that
the ports are disjointed.
Mm.
The opportunity to do
more with Kiwi Rail,
we don't see the push and the drive around that, and
Kiwi Rail we see as a very important part of developing New Zealand.
So you're not seeing that push from Kiwi Rail itself?
Well, it's there.
They're not-
But the truth or the reality for us
is that all the parties need to get around the table and have one
conversation.
Mm.
We're having about 20 conversations-
Mm
... and we need that coordinating view to bring people together and see that view.
Mm.
Good.
All right. I know there was another question I was going to ask, but- Yeah.
Thanks ... it'll come to me momentarily, but I'll let everybody else go.
Just as we mentioned in our submission, if any
of the committee members are traveling and would like to go and view one of our
facilities around the world-
Yeah, please do
... please reach out.
Yeah.
We've got some
pretty funky ones and some ones that are work in progress, but if you're
out and about and you'd like to see what we view a good terminal looks like-
Yeah
... we're happy to show you.
Great. Sorry,
colleagues, you did mention what you can do next.
Yep.
So the what you can do next, you described being able to go back to
a port twice as one of them.
Yep.
Is there anything else that's there, and also how does that play out in terms of
the cost of
importing and exporting?
So what that will do is it'll make us more efficient in terms of-
Yeah
... where we pick up cargo and that.
So it'll play back in cost to serve.
Sorry.
It plays back in our cost to serve.
Yeah.
But that's the one thing that we could see some benefit in the short term.
And then the midterm is around terminals, infrastructure,
how they work.
Yeah. That's very helpful.
Okay, Tony. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thanks for your time.
Thank you for your time.
Hmm